8.4. Watermarks and late data
In any data processing system, there is a certain amount of lag between the time a data event occurs (the “event time”, determined by the timestamp on the data element itself) and the time the actual data element gets processed at any stage in your pipeline (the “processing time”, determined by the clock on the system processing the element). In addition, there are no guarantees that data events will appear in your pipeline in the same order that they were generated.

For example, let’s say we have a PCollection that’s using fixed-time windowing, with windows that are five minutes long. For each window, Beam must collect all the data with an event time timestamp in the given window range (between 0:00 and 4:59 in the first window, for instance). Data with timestamps outside that range (data from 5:00 or later) belong to a different window.

However, data isn’t always guaranteed to arrive in a pipeline in time order, or to always arrive at predictable intervals. Beam tracks a watermark, which is the system’s notion of when all data in a certain window can be expected to have arrived in the pipeline. Once the watermark progresses past the end of a window, any further element that arrives with a timestamp in that window is considered late data.

From our example, suppose we have a simple watermark that assumes approximately 30s of lag time between the data timestamps (the event time) and the time the data appears in the pipeline (the processing time), then Beam would close the first window at 5:30. If a data record arrives at 5:34, but with a timestamp that would put it in the 0:00-4:59 window (say, 3:38), then that record is late data.

Note: For simplicity, we’ve assumed that we’re using a very straightforward watermark that estimates the lag time. In practice, your PCollection's data source determines the watermark, and watermarks can be more precise or complex.

Beam’s default windowing configuration tries to determine when all data has arrived (based on the type of data source) and then advances the watermark past the end of the window. This default configuration does not allow late data. Triggers allow you to modify and refine the windowing strategy for a PCollection. You can use triggers to decide when each individual window aggregates and reports its results, including how the window emits late elements.``
